
London is the capital city of England and the United Kingdom, the largest metropolitan area in the United Kingdom, and the largest urban zone in the European Union by most measures.[note 1] Located on the River Thames, London has been a major settlement for two millennia, its history going back to its founding by the Romans, who named it Londinium.[3] London's ancient core, the City of London, largely retains its square-mile mediaeval boundaries. Since at least the 19th century, the name London has also referred to the metropolis developed around this core.[4] The bulk of this conurbation forms the London region[5] and the Greater London administrative area,[6][note 2] governed by the elected Mayor of London and the London Assembly.[7]
London is a leading global city, with strengths in the arts, commerce, education, entertainment, fashion, finance, healthcare, media, professional services, research and development, tourism and transport all contributing to its prominence.[8] It is the world's leading financial centre alongside New York City[9][10][11] and has the fifth-largest metropolitan area GDP in the world, and the largest in Europe.[12] London has been described as a world cultural capital.[13][14][15][16] It is the world's most-visited city[17] and has the world's largest city airport system measured by passenger traffic.[18] London's 43 universities form the largest concentration of higher education in Europe.[19] In 2012 London became the first city to host the modern Summer Olympic Games three times.[20]
London has a diverse range of peoples and cultures, and more than 300 languages are spoken within its boundaries.[21] In March 2011, London had an official population of 8,174,100, making it the most populous municipality in the European Union,[22][23] and accounting for 12.5% of the UK population.[24] The Greater London Urban Area is the second-largest in the EU with a population of 8,278,251,[25] while the London metropolitan area is the largest in the EU with an estimated total population of between 12 million[26] and 14 million.[27] London had the largest population of any city in the world from around 1831 to 1925.[28]
London contains four World Heritage Sites: the Tower of London; Kew Gardens; the site comprising the Palace of Westminster, Westminster Abbey, and St Margaret's Church; and the historic settlement of Greenwich (in which the Royal Observatory marks the Prime Meridian, 0° longitude, and GMT).[29] Other famous landmarks include Buckingham Palace, the London Eye, Piccadilly Circus, St Paul's Cathedral, Tower Bridge, Trafalgar Square and Wembley Stadium. London is home to numerous museums, galleries, libraries, sporting events and other cultural institutions, including the British Museum, National Gallery, Tate Modern, British Library, Wimbledon, and 40 West End theatres.[30] The London Underground is the oldest underground railway network in the world


Toponymy
Main article: Etymology of London


The name London may derive from the River Thames
The etymology of London is uncertain.[35] It is an ancient name and
can be found in sources from the 2nd century. It is recorded c. 121 as
Londinium, which points to Romano-British origin.[35] The earliest
attempted explanation, now disregarded, is attributed to Geoffrey of
Monmouth in Historia Regum Britanniae.[35] This had it that the name
originated from a supposed King Lud, who had allegedly taken over the
city and named it Kaerlud.[36]
From 1898 it was commonly accepted that the name was of Celtic origin
and meant place belonging to a man called *Londinos; this explanation
has since been rejected.[35] Richard Coates put forward an explanation
in 1998 that it is derived from the pre-Celtic Old European
*(p)lowonida, meaning 'river too wide to ford', and suggested that
this was a name given to the part of the River Thames which flows
through London; from this, the settlement gained the Celtic form of
its name, *Lowonidonjon;[37] this requires quite a serious amendment
however. The ultimate difficulty lies in reconciling the Latin form
Londinium with the modern Welsh Llundain, which should demand a form
*(h)lōndinion (as opposed to *londīnion), from earlier
*loundiniom. The possibility cannot be ruled out that the Welsh name
was borrowed back in from English at a later date, and thus cannot be
used as a basis from which to reconstruct the original name.
Until 1889 the name "London" officially only applied to the City of
London but since then it has also referred to the County of London and
now Greater London.[4]
Prehistory and antiquity


In 1300 the City was still confined within the Roman walls.
Although there is evidence of scattered Brythonic settlements in the
area, the first major settlement was founded by the Romans in 43
AD.[38] This lasted for just seventeen years and around 61, the Iceni
tribe led by Queen Boudica stormed it, burning it to the ground.[39]
The next, heavily planned, incarnation of the city prospered and
superseded Colchester as the capital of the Roman province of
Britannia in 100. At its height during the 2nd century, Roman London
had a population of around 60,000. By the 7th century, the
Anglo-Saxons had created a new settlement called Lundenwic over a mile
(2 km) upstream from the old Roman city, around what is now Covent
Garden.[40]
It is likely that there was a harbour at the mouth of the River Fleet
for fishing and trading, and this trading grew, until the city was
overcome by the Vikings and forced to move east, back to the location
of the Roman Londinium, in order to use its walls for protection.[41]
Viking attacks continued to increase, until 886 when Alfred the Great
recaptured London and made peace with the Danish leader, Guthrum.[42]
The original Saxon city of Lundenwic became Ealdwic ("old city"), a
name surviving to the present day as Aldwych, which is in the modern
City of Westminster.[43]
Two recent discoveries indicate that London could be much older than
previously thought. In 1999 the remains of a Bronze Age bridge were
found on the foreshore north of Vauxhall Bridge.[44] This bridge
either crossed the Thames, or went to a (lost) island in the
river. Dendrology dated the timbers to 1500BC.[44] In 2010 the
foundations of a large timber structure, dated to 4500BC, were found
on the Thames foreshore, south of Vauxhall Bridge.[45] The function of
the mesolithic structure is not known. Both structures are on South
Bank, at a natural crossing point where the River Effra flows into the
River Thames.[45]
Middle Ages


The Lancastrian siege of London in 1471 is attacked by a Yorkist
sally.
With the collapse of Roman rule in the early 5th century, London
ceased to be a capital and was effectively abandoned. However, from
the 6th century, an Anglo-Saxon settlement known as Lundenwic
developed slightly to the west of the old Roman city, around what is
now Covent Garden and the Strand, likely rising to a population of
10–12,000.[40] In the 9th century, London was repeatedly attacked by
Vikings, leading to a return to the location of Roman Londinium, in
order to use its walls for protection.[41] Following the unification
of England in the 10th century, London, already the country's largest
city and most important trading centre, became increasingly important
as a political centre, although it still faced competition from
Winchester, the Anglo-Saxon capital of England and traditional centre
of the kingdom of Wessex.
In the 11th century, King Edward the Confessor refounded and rebuilt
Westminster Abbey, and Westminster, a short distance upstream from
London, became a favoured royal residence. From this point onward,
Westminster steadily supplanted the City of London itself as a venue
for the business of national government.[46]


Westminster Abbey is a World Heritage Site and one of London's oldest
and most important buildings as seen in this painting (Canaletto,
1749)
Following his victory in the Battle of Hastings, William, Duke of
Normandy, was crowned King of England in the newly finished
Westminster Abbey on Christmas Day 1066.[47] William constructed the
Tower of London, the first of the many Norman castles in England to be
rebuilt in stone, in the southeastern corner of the city, to
intimidate the native inhabitants.[48] In 1097, William II began the
building of Westminster Hall, close by the abbey of the same name. The
hall became the basis of a new Palace of Westminster.[49][50]
During the 12th century, the institutions of central government, which
had hitherto accompanied the royal English court as it moved around
the country, grew in size and sophistication and became increasingly
fixed in one place. In most cases this was Westminster, although the
royal treasury, having been moved from Winchester, came to rest in the
Tower. While the City of Westminster developed into a true capital in
governmental terms, its distinct neighbour, the City of London,
remained England's largest city and principal commercial centre, and
it flourished under its own unique administration, the Corporation of
London. In 1100, its population was around 18,000; by 1300 it had
grown to nearly 100,000.[51]
Disaster struck during the Black Death in the mid-14th century, when
London lost nearly a third of its population.[52] London was the focus
of the Peasants' Revolt in 1381.[53]
Early modern


The Great Fire of London destroyed many parts of the city in 1666.


London in 1806
During the Tudor period the Reformation produced a gradual shift to
Protestantism, with much of London passing from church to private
ownership.[54] The traffic in woollen cloths shipped undyed and
undressed from London to the nearby shores of the Low Countries, for
use by well-to-do wearers chiefly in the interior of the
continent.[clarification needed] But the tentacles of English maritime
enterprise hardly extended beyond the seas of north-west Europe. The
commercial route to Italy and the Mediterranean Sea normally lay
through Antwerp and over the Alps; any ships passing through the
Strait of Gibraltar to or from England were likely to be Italian or
Ragusan. Upon the re-opening of the Netherlands to English shipping in
January 1565 there at once ensued a strong outburst of commercial
activity.[55] The Royal Exchange was founded.[56] Mercantilism grew
and monopoly trading companies such as the East India Company were
established, with trade expanding to the New World. London became the
principal North Sea port, with migrants arriving from England and
abroad. The population rose from an estimated 50,000 in 1530 to about
225,000 in 1605.[54]
In the 16th century William Shakespeare and his contemporaries lived
in London at a time of hostility to the development of the theatre. By
the end of the Tudor period in 1603, London was still very
compact. There was an assassination attempt on James I in Westminster,
through the Gunpowder Plot on 5 November 1605.[57] London was plagued
by disease in the early 17th century,[58] culminating in the Great
Plague of 1665–1666, which killed up to 100,000 people, or a fifth of
the population.[59]
The Great Fire of London broke out in 1666 in Pudding Lane in the city
and quickly swept through the wooden buildings.[60] Rebuilding took
over ten years and was supervised by Robert Hooke[61][62][63] as
Surveyor of London.[64] In 1708 Christopher Wren's masterpiece, St
Paul's Cathedral was completed. During the Georgian era new districts
such as Mayfair were formed in the west; and new bridges over the
Thames encouraged development in South London. In the east, the Port
of London expanded downstream.
In 1762 George III acquired Buckingham House and it was enlarged over
the next 75 years. During the 18th century, London was dogged by crime
and the Bow Street Runners were established in 1750 as a professional
police force.[65] In total, more than 200 offences were punishable by
death,[66] and women and children were hanged for petty theft.[67]
Over 74 per cent of children born in London died before they were
five.[68] The coffeehouse became a popular place to debate ideas, with
growing literacy and the development of the printing press making news
widely available; and Fleet Street became the centre of the British
press.
According to Samuel Johnson:
You find no man, at all intellectual, who is willing to leave
London. No, Sir, when a man is tired of London, he is tired of life;
for there is in London all that life can afford.
—Samuel Johnson, 1777[69]
Late modern and contemporary


British volunteer recruits in London, August 1914


A bombed out London street during the Blitz of World War II
London was the world's largest city from about 1831 to 1925.[70]
London's overcrowded conditions led to cholera epidemics,[71] claiming
14,000 lives in 1848, and 6,000 in 1866.[72] Rising traffic congestion
led to the creation of the world's first local urban rail network. The
Metropolitan Board of Works oversaw infrastructure expansion in the
capital and some of the surrounding counties; it was abolished in 1889
when the London County Council was created out of those areas of the
counties surrounding the capital . The Blitz and other bombing by the
German Luftwaffe during World War II killed over 30,000 Londoners and
destroyed large tracts of housing and other buildings across
London. Immediately after the war, the 1948 Summer Olympics were held
at the original Wembley Stadium, at a time when the city had barely
recovered from the war.
In 1951 the Festival of Britain was held on the South Bank. The Great
Smog of 1952 led to the Clean Air Act 1956, which ended the "pea soup
fogs" for which London had been notorious. From the 1940s onwards,
London became home to a large number of immigrants, largely from
Commonwealth countries such as Jamaica, India, Bangladesh and
Pakistan, making London one of the most diverse cities in Europe.
Primarily starting in the mid-1960s, London became a centre for the
worldwide youth culture, exemplified by the Swinging London subculture
associated with the King's Road, Chelsea and Carnaby Street. The role
of trendsetter was revived during the punk era. In 1965 London's
political boundaries were expanded to take into account the growth of
the urban area and a new Greater London Council was created. During
The Troubles in Northern Ireland, London was subjected to bombing
attacks by the Provisional IRA. Racial inequality was highlighted by
the 1981 Brixton riot. Greater London's population declined steadily
in the decades after World War II, from an estimated peak of 8.6
million in 1939 to around 6.8 million in the 1980s. The principal
ports for London moved downstream to Felixstowe and Tilbury, with the
London Docklands area becoming a focus for regeneration as the Canary
Wharf development. This was borne out of London's ever-increasing role
as a major international financial centre during the 1980s.
The Thames Barrier was completed in the 1980s to protect London
against tidal surges from the North Sea. The Greater London Council
was abolished in 1986, which left London as the only large metropolis
in the world without a central administration. In 2000, London-wide
government was restored, with the creation of the Greater London
Authority. To celebrate the start of the 21st century, the Millennium
Dome, London Eye and Millennium Bridge were constructed. On 6 July
2005 London was awarded the 2012 Summer Olympics, making London the
first city to stage the Olympic Games three times.[73]
Government

London

This article is part of the series:
Politics and government of
London
Sovereign
Elizabeth II
Greater London Authority
Mayor
Boris Johnson
Deputy
Victoria Borwick
London Assembly
Mayoral elections
Constituencies
City of London Corporation
Lord Mayor
Sheriff
Wards
Court of Aldermen
Parliament of the United Kingdom
1998 referendum
GLA Act 1999
GLA Act 2007
Elections
Constituencies
European Parliament
Elections
European Parliament constituency
Committee of the Regions
Subsidiarity
Boroughs
Middle Temple
Inner Temple
 British politics portal
v t e
Local government
Main articles: Local government in London, History of local government
in London, and List of heads of London government
The administration of London is formed of two tiers—a city-wide,
strategic tier and a local tier. City-wide administration is
coordinated by the Greater London Authority (GLA), while local
administration is carried out by 33 smaller authorities.[74] The GLA
consists of two elected components; the Mayor of London, who has
executive powers, and the London Assembly, who scrutinise the mayor's
decisions and can accept or reject his budget proposals each year. The
headquarters of the GLA is City Hall, Southwark; the mayor is Boris
Johnson. The mayor's statutory planning strategy is published as the
London Plan, which was most recently revised in 2011.[75] The local
authorities are the councils of the 32 London boroughs and the City of
London Corporation.[76] They are responsible for most local services,
such as local planning, schools, social services, local roads and
refuse collection. Certain functions, such as waste management, are
provided through joint arrangements. In 2009–2010 the combined revenue
expenditure by London councils and the GLA amounted to just over £22
billion (£14.7 billion for the boroughs and £7.4 billion for the
GLA)[77]
Policing in Greater London, with the exception of the City of London,
is provided by the Metropolitan Police Force, overseen by the
Metropolitan Police Authority. The City of London has its own police
force – the City of London Police.[78] The British Transport Police
are responsible for police services on National Rail and London
Underground services.[79]
The London Fire Brigade is the statutory fire and rescue service for
Greater London. It is run by the London Fire and Emergency Planning
Authority and is the third-largest fire service in the world.[80]
National Health Service ambulance services are provided by the London
Ambulance Service (LAS) NHS Trust, the largest free at the point of
use emergency ambulance service in the world.[81] The London Air
Ambulance charity operates in conjunction with the LAS where
required. Her Majesty's Coastguard and the Royal National Lifeboat
Institution operate on the River Thames.[82][83]
National government
London is the seat of the Government of the United Kingdom, which is
located around the Palace of Westminster. Many government departments
are located close to Parliament, particularly along Whitehall,
including the Prime Minister's residence at 10 Downing Street.[84] The
British Parliament is often referred to as the "Mother of Parliaments"
(although this sobriquet was first applied to England itself by John
Bright)[85] because it has been the model for most other parliamentary
systems, and its Acts have created many other parliaments.
Geography

Main article: Geography of London
Scope
Greater London is the top-level administrative subdivision covering
London. The small, ancient City of London at its core once contained
the whole settlement, but as the urban area grew the City Corporation
resisted attempts to amalgamate it with its suburbs, causing "London"
to be defined in a number ways for different purposes; and the
situation was once open to legal debate.[86] Forty per cent of Greater
London is covered by the London post town, within which 'LONDON' forms
part of postal addresses.[87][88]


Satellite view of London


Map of central London
The London telephone area code (020) covers a larger area, similar in
size to Greater London, although some outer districts are omitted and
some places just outside are included. The area within the orbital M25
motorway is normally what is referred to as 'London'.[89] and the
Greater London boundary has been aligned to it in places.[90]
Outward urban expansion is now prevented by the Metropolitan Green
Belt,[91] although the built-up area extends beyond the boundary in
places, resulting in a separately defined Greater London Urban
Area. Beyond this is the vast London commuter belt.[92] Greater London
is split for some purposes into Inner London and Outer London.[93] The
city is split by the River Thames into North and South, with an
informal central London area in its interior. The coordinates of the
nominal centre of London, traditionally considered to be the original
Eleanor Cross at Charing Cross near the junction of Trafalgar Square
and Whitehall, are approximately 51°30′26″N 00°07′39″W.[94]
Status
Within London, both the City of London and the City of Westminster
have city status and both the City of London and the remainder of
Greater London are the ceremonial counties.[95] The area of Greater
London has incorporated areas that were once part of the historic
counties of Middlesex, Kent, Surrey, Essex and Hertfordshire.[96]
London's status as the capital of England, and later the United
Kingdom, has never been granted or confirmed officially—by statute or
in written form.[note 4]
Its position was formed through constitutional convention, making its
status as de facto capital a part of the UK's unwritten
constitution. The capital of England was moved to London from
Winchester as the Palace of Westminster developed in the 12th and 13th
centuries to become the permanent location of the royal court, and
thus the political capital of the nation.[100] More recently, Greater
London has been defined as a region of England and in this context
known as London.[5]
Topography


Primrose Hill.
Greater London covers an area of 1,583 square kilometres (611 sq mi),
an area which had a population of 7,172,036 in 2001 and a population
density of 4,542 inhabitants per square kilometre (11,760 /sq mi). A
larger area, referred to as the London Metropolitan Region or the
London Metropolitan Agglomeration covers an area of 8,382 square
kilometres (3,236 sq mi) has a population of 12,653,500 and a
population density of 1,510 inhabitants per square kilometre (3,900
/sq mi).[101] Modern London stands on the Thames, its primary
geographical feature, a navigable river which crosses the city from
the south-west to the east. The Thames Valley is a floodplain
surrounded by gently rolling hills including Parliament Hill,
Addington Hills, and Primrose Hill. The Thames was once a much
broader, shallower river with extensive marshlands; at high tide, its
shores reached five times their present width.[102]
Since the Victorian era the Thames has been extensively embanked, and
many of its London tributaries now flow underground. The Thames is a
tidal river, and London is vulnerable to flooding.[103] The threat has
increased over time due to a slow but continuous rise in high water
level by the slow 'tilting' of Britain (up in the north and down in
the south) caused by post-glacial rebound.[104]
In 1974, a decade of work began on the construction of the Thames
Barrier across the Thames at Woolwich to deal with this threat. While
the barrier is expected to function as designed until roughly 2070,
concepts for its future enlargement or redesign are already being
discussed.[105]
Climate
"The weather in London" redirects here. On Wikipedia, it once was long
used as a deliberate example of a non-existent page in Wikipedia
documentation, see Talk:The weather in London for more details.
London has a temperate oceanic climate, similar to much of southern
Britain. Despite its reputation as being a rainy city, London receives
less precipitation in a year than Rome at 834 mm (32.8 in), or
Bordeaux at 923 mm (36.3 in).[106] Winters are generally chilly to
cold with frost usually occurring in the suburbs on average twice a
week from November to March. Snow usually occurs about four or five
times a year mostly from December to February. Snowfall during March
and April is rare but does occur every two or three years. Winter
temperatures seldom fall below −4 °C (24.8 °F) or rise above 14 °C
(57.2 °F). During the winter of 2010, London experienced its lowest
temperature on record (−14 °C (6.8 °F)) in Northolt and the heaviest
snow seen for almost two decades, a huge strain on the city's
transport infrastructure. Temperature extremes for all sites in the
London area range from 38.1 °C (100.6 °F) at Kew during August 2003,
(which has been proposed to be the UK's highest 'accurate'
temperature)[107] down to −16.1 °C (3.0 °F) at Northolt during January
1962.[108] Temperatures of below −20 °C (−4.0 °F) have been noted
prior to the 20th century, but the accuracy cannot be validated.
Summers are generally warm and sometimes hot, the heat being boosted
by the urban heat island effect making the centre of London at times 5
°C (9 °F) warmer than the suburbs and outskirts. London's summer
average is 24 °C (75.2 °F). On average there are 7 days a year above
30 °C (86.0 °F) and 2 days a year above 32 °C (89.6 °F). Temperatures
of 26 °C (80 °F) usually occur on a weekly basis from mid- June to
late August.
During the 2003 European heat wave there were 14 consecutive days
above 30 °C (86.0 °F) and 2 consecutive days where temperatures soared
up to 38 °C (100.4 °F), leading to hundreds of heat related
deaths. Rain generally occurs on around 2 out of 10 summer
days. Spring and Autumn are mixed seasons and can be pleasant. On 1
October 2011, the air temperature attained 30 °C (86.0 °F) and in
April 2011 it reached 28 °C (82.4 °F). However in recent years both of
these months have also had snowfall. Temperature extremes range from
−10 °C (14.0 °F) to 37.9 °C (100.2 °F).
